Chapter IV
Disputes and Differences
The National ID
Nepal’s National ID system is based on the World Bank's “Digital Identification for Development” (ID4D) model. This system is designed to be universal and applicable to all the residents of the country. The Nepal government has mandated this ID for all residents, but in reality, only those with a citizenship certificate can obtain the Digital ID. This poses a big problem as many individuals, especially vulnerable groups like single mothers, struggle to obtain citizenship certificates. As a result, they are excluded from the National ID program and cannot benefit from the services connected to it.
During the enrollment process for the National ID, if someone does not have a clear citizenship record, other documents such as a driver’s license, academic certificates, or land ownership papers can be used to help verify their personal information. However, these documents only serve to support or cross-check existing data and cannot replace the citizenship certificate when it comes to actually registering for the National ID.
According to the National ID and Civil Registration Act and its regulations, no government official, whether at the national or local level, is allowed to issue a National ID to anyone who does not have a citizenship certificate.
The Digital ID system is closely linked to citizenship laws and is limited to nationals, so it will not address legislative gaps related to discrimination based on membership. Residents without citizenship certificates are automatically excluded from accessing digital rights and services due to the high entry requirements.
The NID is designed to be a functional identification card with its main objective being the digital identification of all citizens.63 Once digitized, citizenship status and rights are linked to citizenship certification, allowing interoperability for accessing public services such as land registration, transportation, and social security benefits. It also allows for accessing private services in commercial banks and for official offline use when necessary.64 For the government, its primary function is to enhance surveillance for public security and crime control, including immigration regulations.
Given Nepal’s high rate of labor migration, immigration served as a strategic opportunity to implement mandatory National ID enrollment. In November 2021, when the government made NID compulsory for obtaining passports, the Office of Immigration began requiring a NIN. This added another bureaucratic hurdle to the already complex passport application process. The significant number of Nepali migrants creates a high demand for passports, and the NIN requirement led to a substantial increase in enrollment. While making NID mandatory for foreign travel increased enrollment pressure, the government was not well equipped to handle the enrollments and distribute NID cards at that pace. In 2021, the mandatory enrollment for NID to obtain passports was introduced at a time when even citizens who had enrolled as early as 2019 had not yet received their NID cards in Sarlahi, Khotang, and other parts of the country.
Box 8: Making NID mandatory: Resistance and Reversals
The NID card, envisioned as a central tool for identification and service delivery, was intended to be accessible to all residents. As NID enrollment numbers fell short of expectations, the government began making it mandatory first to obtain e-passports. The government increasingly used mandatory requirements to boost registration. Over time, the NID has been made compulsory for accessing a wide range of public and private services.
A notice published by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Nepal Gazette (Nepal Rajpatra) in June 2024 made it compulsory to present the NID for services such as opening bank accounts, registering SIM cards, receiving social security allowances, sitting for Public Service Commission (Lok Sewa) examinations, and completing land or vehicle transactions. The card was also made mandatory for people with disabilities, the elderly, and single women receiving social security allowances.
The government faced criticism for enforcing the NID requirement for social security benefits without ensuring proper distribution of the cards. Many eligible individuals had yet to receive their NID cards, creating significant barriers to access.
In response, Nepal’s Supreme Court issued an interim order in July 2024, suspending the mandatory NID requirement for accessing public services.
However, in early January 2025, the Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) issued a directive requiring the NID number to open new bank accounts starting from January 14, 2025. This move was based on the same June 2024 Gazette notice, which financial institutions were instructed to follow. Several major banks began rejecting new account applications without an NID number, leading to confusion among customers.
Later that month, the Supreme Court nullified its previous interim orders, officially allowing the government to move forward with enforcing the NID requirement across multiple services.
Despite this, the government walked back on one key provision: the requirement of the NID for receiving social security allowances. A cabinet meeting in July directed the Home Ministry to take the initiative for not making National Identity Card mandatory for social security allowance for now, considering the difficulties faced by citizens to get the ID card. During a parliamentary session in March 2025, Home Minister Ramesh Lekhak announced that certain groups would be exempt from presenting an NID to access essential services: children, persons unable to care for themselves, individuals with disabilities, the helpless, and citizens over 90 years old.
The government’s shifting stance and hasty implementation, without adequate planning or infrastructure, has drawn criticism for creating confusion and distress. The use of fear and pressure tactics to enforce the NID has raised serious concerns about citizens’ rights and equitable access to services.
Pending Verification
During the NID enrollment process, many citizens faced a common issue of “pending verification”. Their data was unverified for reasons unknown to them. Upon closer examination, the cases with pending verification had two common patterns.
The first pattern was related to longstanding administrative inconsistencies in the distribution of citizenship certification. It is common to find errors and variations in dates of birth and the spelling of last names, particularly among the poor, less educated, and illiterate individuals or among distinctly different ethnic names compared to dominant groups. These variations often result in them being unable to apply or having their online entries rejected with a “pending” status. They are then required to repeat a bureaucratic procedure they have already completed in the past to obtain a new citizenship certificate. This not only adds additional burden for users, but also creates unnecessary strain on the District Administration Office, where there is always a long queue of migrant laborers hoping to obtain a citizenship certificate as a prerequisite to issue a passport. During our visit to the DAO in Sarlahi, the unceasing administrative burden and cumbersome service was starkly visible, among other things, due in part to mismatches between service infrastructure and the volume of residents seeking documents like citizenship certificates and National IDs.
The second pattern emerged from human errors made while filling out forms, as well as from the process used by mobile stations to handle offline applications. If mistakes such as typos or inconsistencies were identified later, the form was automatically marked as “pending.” The errors were more common in the case of mobile stations where the online verification process was unavailable at the spot, and only when the details were entered online errors were detected later. In both scenarios, citizens had to restart the entire process to verify and complete their enrollment application.
Lack of Accurate and Accessible Information
The NID initiative, intended to streamline citizen services and promote digital governance, has largely failed to effectively communicate its purpose, benefits, and implications to the general public. Users, who should be at the center of the project, appear to be either misinformed or entirely uninformed about the actual use of the NID. Government officials at the central level have acknowledged that even higher-level discussions were limited, and the program’s hasty implementation left little room for proper public engagement.
The FGDs and interviews with citizens in Sarlahi indicated that most citizens were not properly informed by the authorities about the purpose and usage of the National ID. They were not informed about fundamental questions such as why the NID is needed, what the biometric card looks like, and how the NID system works. In all the FGDs conducted in Sarlahi and Khotang, participants stated that they enrolled for NID because they were told that it was “mandatory” and that NID would replace the citizenship certificate in the future. When asked who informed them that the NID would replace the citizenship certificate, most responses were based on hearsay rather than reliable or official information.
In Sarlahi, unlike in Khotang, some people believed that the National ID would be similar to India’s Aadhaar card and would offer various benefits. However, when they were asked who told them about this and what specific information was shared, their answers were unclear and mostly based on rumors. Participants in the FGDs also mentioned that such rumors were deliberately spread to encourage people to register quickly. As one participant put it, “This kind of talk was spread just to make people fill out the forms at a faster rate,” referring to the intention to accelerate the form-filling process.
In all three FGDs conducted with women and marginalized individuals in Sarlahi, it was found that local leaders referenced Aadhaar, assuming people would see an incentive in enrolling immediately. However, citizens later discovered that no additional services would be tied to the NID. Beyond a brief orientation for local staff and officials, and minimal guidance offered at the enrollment station, the government had made little investment in public education or awareness-raising around biometric systems.
Government officials at the central level have acknowledged that end-users are ill informed, largely due to limited deliberation and rushed implementations, even at higher levels. This hurriedness, combined with lack of assessment of digital public infrastructure and basic commitment to education and outreach programs, has shaped a fragmented communication landscape, opening spaces for misinformation.
In both Sarlahi and Khotang, it was found that women were less informed about the NID compared to men. Many women enrolled simply because their male family members took them along or asked them to go. During a FGD with female participants in Godaita, Sarlahi, two women said they were unaware of the NID mobile team, stating, “We are daughters-in-law of this village so we don’t know about that.” Further discussion revealed that they did not have citizenship certificates, which is why they were uninformed. In Khotang, a respondent described a scenario where an orphan child, who grew up without a family, “might not know the name of their own mother, let alone that of their grandfather and grandmother.”
Saying that the National ID is “mandatory for all” is misleading, especially for Nepali residents who can’t obtain citizenship certificates due to reasons such as birth or marriage. Nevertheless, the pressure to enroll is strong, and many people are signing up for the NID Cards, even if they do not fully understand it or have limited information.
Standardizing Bodies
“The system has difficulty recording the fingerprints of individuals who work outdoors in the village, especially those in the construction field, who are exposed to cement and sand.”
In Khotang, an officer at the DAO office reported this. He further mentioned that, due to the mandate to make the card enrollment mandatory, those with difficult-to-read prints are categorized as having “damaged” fingerprints to complete the process. While temporary fixes, such as applying sanitizers or pressing users’ hands together, sometimes help, in many cases the issue persists. When data is marked as “damaged,” it can also affect passport verification, as the fingerprints do not align, leading to difficulties in obtaining a passport or even outright rejection.
Many workers worry that as their fingerprints become rougher over time, biometric machines will continue to fail in verifying them. Officers admit they have no lasting solution to this problem, often resorting only to consoling users instead of addressing the root issue.
It has been observed that class and ethnic divisions are being reinforced during the implementation of biometric enrollment. Workers who regularly handle coarse materials, such as sand and iron, or work with different chemicals in paddy fields or factories, have experienced issues with biometric machines not properly recording their fingerprints. The machines often require multiple attempts to recognize the fingerprints of workers who engage in physical labor.
Citizens who have not been officially identified due to a “pending” status, and those who have difficulty verifying their identity on the spot, often through fingerprints, are frequently excluded. Reports of migrants being unable to travel abroad for employment due to being “not verified” for NID registration because of faded fingerprints or “pending” verification status are increasing.
Respondents also reported experiencing ethnic discrimination linked to the use of biometric technology. In Khotang, for example, many individuals from ethnic communities have been required to undergo multiple rounds of iris scans because the generic technology more easily recognizes the bodily features of dominant groups than those of marginalized ones. Ethnic individuals in Khotang have experienced discrimination, especially verbal, while undergoing multiple iris scans.
An officer responsible for taking biometric records at the CDO office admitted that there are difficulties in capturing retinal scans of local citizens with diverse features, particularly senior citizens.”65 The officer mentioned that due to the “specific eye features of ethnic individuals, they sometimes need to provide assistance during iris-scans.”66 This issue appears to be more prevalent in Khotang, especially among senior citizens, with no similar issues reported in Sarlahi.
During a FGD with persons with disabilities (PwDs), they highlighted numerous challenges arising from gaps in awareness, infrastructure, technology, and implementation. Many biometric enrollment centers are inaccessible due to the lack of ramps, wider doorways, proper seating accommodations or accessible toilets. Poor public transport accessibility limits their ability to reach enrollment centers. Even when they manage to reach these centers, government staff are often not trained to assist physically impaired applicants in a dignified and informed manner. At the enrollment centers, people with limited stamina or muscular dystrophy struggle to wait in long queues without proper accommodations.
There were instances of mistreatment and discrimination towards PwDs at enrollment stations and the DAO.67 Many applicants with physical or developmental impairment reported “mistreatment by government officials.” PwDs, particularly those who may move more slowly, described facing hostility while submitting biometric data. Many deaf individuals struggled to follow instructions or express their concerns at enrollment centers, which lacked sign language support or alternative communication tools such as visual displays and writing aids. Similarly, biometric devices like fingerprint readers and iris scanners do not provide automatic audio feedback, making it difficult for blind and low-vision users to understand the process. Many enrollment centers lack alternative communication tools, making it challenging for deaf individuals to understand instructions or communicate their concerns.
Box 9: Key concerns of the PwDs
Provide government officials with proper training and sensitization to better address the needs of PwDs, as there is a serious lack of sensitivity and awareness among government officials when providing fair and equitable services.
Regularly organize special outreach camps or enrollment drives to make services more accessible to PwDs, as enrollment centers lack alternative accommodation and communication tools.
Ensure more grievance redressal options for PwDs when they encounter procedural barriers or face enrollment denials, in order to make the enrollment process more inclusive.
During a FGD with members of the queer community, concerns were raised about the NID card and its potential to exacerbate existing inequalities. One significant issue highlighted by the queer community is the lack of a meaningful consultation system that fails to include the queer community.
Another major concern is the lack of information about how personal data, including sensitive details about gender identity, will be protected. People fear their privacy will be violated, especially if their gender expression does not match their legal gender. Some participants who have already received their NID shared their experience of being asked invasive questions in public such as, “Why are you unmarried even at the age of 35?”. Being questioned about one’s gender identity, particularly in their hometowns where being out could be dangerous poses the risk of further social marginalization and ostracization. The risk of their gender identity being revealed to local officials who know them personally was also flagged as a serious concern, potentially creating unsafe situations at home.
Many in the community questioned the need for gender categorization on the National ID at all, suggesting a separate document that proves nationality and provides access to public services without defining gender. The current system labels gender diverse individuals as “other”, increasing the risk of discrimination and harassment from government employees. Participants also raised concerns about the limited “other” gender category, which does not reflect the diversity of gender identities and feels like an imposed label. Furthermore, transgender individuals who have not been able to update their legal gender due to financial limitations, lack of resources, or social stigma are forced to carry an ID with an incorrect gender marker. Participants also mentioned that they are worried that having “other” on their NID threatens their confidentiality and privacy. They fear that personal information being misused online in a country with weak digital security could lead to job loss, career damage, and even physical harm for queer individuals.
Biometric tools being used today are not just meant to record or standardize people’s physical features, they can also inadvertently make social inequalities worse. For instance, when such technologies fail to account for the diverse backgrounds and lived realities of different groups, they risk excluding significant portions of society. Rather than relying on “one-size-fits-all” designs that risk entrenching unfair treatment and amplifying existing discrimination, biometric systems should be intentionally developed to promote fairness, inclusivity, and equal access for all.
Box 10: Key concerns of the queer community
Remove the gender category from the National ID Card, to allow individuals to access public services without disclosing their gender identity in unsafe situations. This change would also decrease discrimination faced by queer individuals seeking public services.
Government staff should undergo training on etiquette and sensitivity when interacting with queer individuals. This training should focus on avoiding personal questions and promoting respectful engagement.
It is important to involve a diverse range of queer individuals and organizations as key stakeholders in governmental discussions and the evaluation of the National ID system. This will ensure an inclusive, effective, and meaningful consultation process.
Lack of Public Consultations
NID is one of Nepal’s largest digital projects, intended to improve efficiency and access to essential services such as public identification, social security allowances, migration opportunities, banking facilities, and more. Each of these services has a direct impact on people’s daily lives.
However, in drafting this legislation, the government bypassed rigorous, transparent parliamentary debates and meaningful public consultations. Despite the project’s foundational importance to society, the state made little effort to inform the public or consult diverse stakeholders. Excluding civil society and NGOs during implementation ultimately severely compromised the project’s transparency and accountability.
Our consultations with CSOs and CBOs in Sarlahi, Khotang and Kathmandu revealed that government agencies did not provide sufficient information on the National ID. Information on digital identification, biometric data, and the purpose and process of NID was neither effectively produced, nor widely promoted or distributed. The information available on the DoNIDCR website is limited to “frequently asked questions” and only in Nepali. Citing Article 5(3) of the Right to Information Act, 2007 DoNIDCR also uploads progress reports as “proactive disclosure”, but they are not user friendly. Information production and dissemination suffer significantly. When enrollment began in places like Khotang and Sarlahi, citizens were not adequately informed, contradicting the government’s claims of transparency. Millions of residents without access to citizenship certificates were excluded from enrollment, failing the promise of including all residents for digital identification.
Misinformation or the lack of proper information was reported in both Khotang and Sarlahi. Separate consultations with media practitioners, FNCCI members, and civil society actors in both districts reported similar experiences. They were not invited to any public consultations when the enrollment for the National ID started in their districts. They lacked basic information about the digital system and how the digital ID would be used. They highlighted the need for digital sensitization and acknowledged their lack of awareness about the biometric database and its use.
In contrast to Sarlahi and Khotang, consultations with CSOs in Kathmandu, indicated that, depending on their engagement, orientation and interest people had different kinds of information and various levels of understanding about digitization and the function of the National ID. They also expressed unanimous concerns, questioning how the government would ensure data authentication while maintaining the privacy of individuals in the database. In the absence of public consultations and with the National ID cards yet to be distributed, they expressed confusion about how the digital ID would contribute to transparency and good governance.
During the FGDs with people with disabilities (PwDs) and the queer community, they raised similar concerns. PwDs shared that they were instructed to obtain a National ID card in order to access services, as it was a mandatory requirement, but were not provided with adequate information or guidance. This gave the impression that the government was relying on coercive tactics rather than meaningful engagement and support. They felt that the government is not serious about training public officials to use technology in a way that respects and includes people from all backgrounds. The current system is lacking in sensitivity and awareness toward demographic diversity and the specific needs of the queer community.
Many civil society organizations such as Digital Rights Nepal68 have expressed strong concerns about the government’s attempts to restrict their role in assisting individuals in accessing digital platforms and important public information. This restriction prevents end-users, especially those from marginalized groups, from receiving the necessary support and information they require.
FGDs in Sarlahi and Khotang revealed that the lack of public consultations directly impacted citizens’ limited understanding of issues and hindered the active role of CSOs. The study also found that end-users were largely uninformed about the function of the National ID and the benefits they would receive once the digital ID was implemented. Many were misinformed about the program, as they were led to believe that enrolling for their NID would result in receiving rations or relief funds. Poor communication and the spread of misinformation led them to equate the NID with the Indian Aadhaar program, especially in Sarlahi. These actions underscore that transparent, accurate information sharing is vital to good governance. The government could have utilized various mediums to provide information and circulated it in different local languages as needed. Collaborating with CSOs would have enhanced outreach and ensured more inclusive and informed public engagement.